docs(concepts): revise layered model for services (#692)
akka/akka-sdk: docs/src/modules/concepts/pages/architecture-model.adoc

= Service structure and layers

include::ROOT:partial$include.adoc[]

Akka allows developers to focus on domain modeling and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) without needing to manage low-level persistence or concurrency concerns. The organization of an Akka service into clear layers makes this possible.

== Layered structure

> Akka services follow a layered model where each layer has a distinct role. The layers are arranged concentrically, like an onion. The innermost layer holds business logic. Outer layers coordinate and expose that logic to the outside world.

Author: Good catch, thanks. I updated several links.

image::docs-onion_architecture-v1.min.svg[Layered Structure of a Service, width=400]

Each layer should live in its own package:

* `domain`: for the domain model
* `application`: for Akka components
* `api`: for external-facing endpoints

> Layers only call inward. The outermost layer may call the application layer. The application layer may use the domain layer. Direct calls from outer layers into domain objects are avoided.

Reviewer: Yes, the layers are a little blurred regarding the types. We can recommend that domain types should not leak out through the API layer. 

But if we start saying: the application layer can touch the domain, but not expose it, than the application layer needs to map domain types to application types. 

Then the endpoint (API layer) takes the application types and convert to yet another set of types for the public API. That's too much. 

We can keep the recommendation short as in "don't expose your domain types to the outside world". The rest we can leave to the users to decide.

> Layers only call inward. The outermost layer may call the application layer. The application layer may use the domain layer. Direct calls from outer layers into domain objects are avoided.

Reviewer: As discussed this, entities and domain modelling get easily blurred. We can have some guidelines, but users will adopt different styles and that's all fine. And even desirable, people want freedom to decide on those matters.

> Layers only call inward. The outermost layer may call the application layer. The application layer may use the domain layer. Direct calls from outer layers into domain objects are avoided.

Author: ```suggestion
Try not to expose domain types directly to the outside world. The API layer should not call the domain layer. Inner layers should not depend on or be aware of outer layers.
```

== Layer overview

=== Domain

This layer contains business rules and domain concepts. It does not depend on Akka or other runtime concerns. These are plain Java classes, often using `record` to reduce boilerplate. Examples include logic to enforce limits, compute totals, or apply rules.

You can write unit tests for this layer without needing to start Akka or the runtime. The domain package remains isolated, focused, and easy to change.

=== Application

This layer connects the domain model to the Akka runtime. It contains the components that handle persistence, coordination, and external interaction. These components follow event-driven patterns and manage state in a way that supports consistency and responsiveness.

Most classes in this layer are based on Akka-provided building blocks. The domain logic remains in the inner layer. This layer makes it operational.

=== API

> This layer connects your service to the outside world. It defines endpoints using annotations like `@HttpEndpoint`, `@Get`, `@Post`, and others. These map to HTTP or gRPC interfaces.

Author: ```suggestion
This layer connects your service to the outside world. It defines endpoints that expose application functionality over HTTP or gRPC. Requests are handled here and passed on to the application layer.
```

Endpoints use xref:java:component-and-service-calls.adoc#_component_client[`ComponentClient`] to call Akka components in the application layer. This maintains separation of concerns and ensures runtime boundaries are respected.

The API layer may also expose public event models over Kafka or other channels. External systems should interact with your service only through this layer.

Access control and request validation also belong here. For HTTP-specific guidance, see xref:java:http-endpoints.adoc[Designing HTTP Endpoints].

== Mapping layers to project structure

Each layer described above corresponds to a distinct package in the source tree. This structure helps reinforce separation of concerns and makes it easy to locate different types of logic in a project.

A typical Akka service might have a layout like the following:

[source,txt]
----
src/
 └── main/
     └── java/com/example/
         ├── domain/        # Business logic
         ├── application/   # Akka components
         └── api/           # External endpoints

> ----

Reviewer 2: The structure for a real project is more like:
```
 [org.application-name].[module-name].[api|application|domain]`
 ```
Examples:

* `com.northwind.trading.api`
* `com.northwind.trading.application.StockEntity`
* `com.acme.petclinic.domain.VisitRecord`

Author: See https://github.com/akka/akka-sdk/pull/692/files#diff-6b7757175e35345f05f6625d99c8de768523c3866ad003e4d2d6dcd63b7913a7R55
